---
title: Cats 2.0 migration guide
date: Tue 10 Sep 2019 02:38:31 AM CDT
tags: scala, fp, typelevel, cats
---


[Typelevel](https://typelevel.org/) has just published [Cats 2.0.0](https://github.com/typelevel/cats/releases/tag/v2.0.0),
and while the core modules are guaranteed to be binary compatible with 1.x, there are some changes
that break source compatibility. Most of these changes are
unlikely to affect users, but a few will, and the goal of this post is to point out which those are and what you can do
about them.

Note that while some of the stuff below is pretty intense, it's unlikely to apply to you. In fact if
you're not using `Parallel`, there's like a 99% chance you can close this tab right now and go
change your Cats version and everything will be fine. There are also always people in the [Cats
Gitter channel](https://gitter.im/typelevel/cats) who are happy to help. In any case please don't be intimidated
and put off updating to 2.0.0—the community is healthier if adopters invest in staying up to date.

<!-- MORE -->

## Testing

If you depend on cats-laws or cats-testkit, you'll definitely need to be sure that you're using
[ScalaCheck](https://www.scalacheck.org/) 1.14 instead of 1.13, which the 1.x versions of these
modules depended on. You'll also need to be sure that your dependencies that transitively bring in
either these modules or ScalaCheck
have been updated.

Note that the optional ScalaCheck dependency in [ScalaTest](http://www.scalatest.org/) changed from 1.13 to
1.14 between ScalaTest 3.0.5 and 3.0.6, so to be absolutely safe you should update to a
version of ScalaTest that's more recent than 3.0.5, but in practice I don't remember whether that's
likely to cause problems.

It's likely that you'll also need to make some changes to any laws-checking code you have, since for example both
[Discipline](https://github.com/typelevel/discipline) and cats-testkit have dropped their ScalaTest
dependencies since 1.x. The Cats [documentation on laws checking](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/lawtesting.html) is
up to date for 2.0.0 and fairly comprehensive.

## Dependencies

In general you don't need to worry about whether all of your non-test dependencies that transitively
depend on Cats have been updated to 2.0.0 yet, as long as they're available for at least 1.x. Most
other libraries are unlikely to depend on the non-core Cats modules that do break binary
compatibility (cats-laws, cats-kernel-laws, cats-testkit, and alleycats), and since the core module
jars are a drop-in replacement for the 1.x jars at runtime, you shouldn't need to worry about any cats-core
evictions you see in your build. You can also be confident that everything will _definitely_ be fine (at least
in this respect) if your code compiles.

There are exceptions that can lead to your code not compiling because your dependencies haven't been
updated, though. If you update your cats-core dependency to 2.0.0 but
leave [cats-effect](https://github.com/typelevel/cats-effect) at 1.4.0, for example, the last two
lines in the following code won't compile:

```scala
import cats.Parallel, cats.effect.{ContextShift, IO}
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext

implicit val cs: ContextShift[IO] = IO.contextShift(ExecutionContext.global)

Parallel[IO]
Parallel[IO, IO.Par]
```

To make matters worse, the compiler's errors will be completely unhelpful:

```scala
scala> Parallel[IO]
<console>:16: error: could not find implicit value for parameter P: cats.Parallel[cats.effect.IO]
       Parallel[IO]
               ^
```

The compiler fails to find the instance here because cats-effect 1.4.0 provides the `Parallel`
instance for `IO` using the older version of `Parallel` with two type parameters (see the next
section for more details about this change). Even though you've updated your source to use the new
version, and even though the new version is _binary_-compatible with the old version, the fact that
you're on a version of cats-effect that uses the old version means you're out of luck, because the
implicit resolution relies on source compatibility that we've broken.

Fortunately cats-effect has [already been updated](https://github.com/typelevel/cats-effect/releases/tag/v2.0.0),
and this issue is unlikely to come up in many other cases. If you do find yourself with disappearing
instances like this, you can run `sbt evicted` to see if the dependencies that are providing the
instances are still on Cats 1.x.

## Using Parallel instances

The biggest source-compatibility-breaking change in 2.0.0 was introduced in [the second release candidate](https://github.com/typelevel/cats/releases/tag/v2.0.0-RC2),
and involves `Parallel`'s second type parameter [becoming a type member](https://github.com/typelevel/cats/pull/3012).
I've previously written about [how and why](https://meta.plasm.us/posts/2019/09/06/fuck-yeah-type-erasure/) we made this change, so
I'll just focus here on what you'll need to do about it.

If you're currently using [cats-par](https://github.com/ChristopherDavenport/cats-par), there's not
much you have to do. You can remove your cats-par dependency (there is a [release](https://github.com/ChristopherDavenport/cats-par/releases/tag/v1.0.0-RC2) that should work
with 2.0.0, but it's no longer necessary and everything in it has been deprecated), remove your `cats.temp.par` imports,
and replace `cats.temp.par.Par` everywhere with `cats.Parallel`.

The rest of this section and the next will focus on
the case where you're not using cats-par, or where you're mixing `Par` and `Parallel` in your code.

If you're referring to `cats.Parallel` explicitly, you'll generally be able to get away with just
deleting the second type parameter. For example, if you have this method (borrowed from the cats-par documentation):

```scala
def withoutPar[F[_]: Monad, G[_], A, C, D](as: List[A], f: A => Kleisli[F, C, D])
  (implicit P: Parallel[F, G]): Kleisli[F, C, List[D]] =
    as.parTraverse(f)
```
You'd remove the `G`:

```scala
def withoutPar[F[_]: Monad, A, C, D](as: List[A], f: A => Kleisli[F, C, D])
  (implicit P: Parallel[F]): Kleisli[F, C, List[D]] =
    as.parTraverse(f)
```
And you're done. You can even make it a little nicer by making `Parallel` a constraint bound:

```scala
def withoutPar[F[_]: Monad: Parallel, A, C, D]
  (as: List[A], f: A => Kleisli[F, C, D]): Kleisli[F, C, List[D]] =
    as.parTraverse(f)
```
But that's just syntactic sugar.

In some (less common) cases, you may need to keep the type parameter around, but with some rearrangements.
Suppose you have the following (which doesn't really make sense as something you'd actually want to do,
but the fact that I have to stretch for an example is good, I guess):

```scala
import cats.{CommutativeApplicative, FlatMap, Parallel}

import cats.instances.list._, cats.syntax.parallel._

def parUSeqList[M[_], F[_], A](xs: List[M[List[A]]])
  (implicit P: Parallel[M, F], F: CommutativeApplicative[F]) = 
    xs.parUnorderedSequence
```

You can't just remove the `F` this time, because it has a constraint (`CommutativeApplicative`), so
you'll have to add a `.Aux`:

```scala
import cats.{CommutativeApplicative, FlatMap, Parallel}

import cats.instances.list._, cats.syntax.parallel._

def parUSeqList[M[_], F[_], A](xs: List[M[List[A]]])
  (implicit P: Parallel.Aux[M, F], F: CommutativeApplicative[F]) = 
    xs.parUnorderedSequence
```

You might also run into a situation where the `F` appears in your return type, and the solution is the same: add `.Aux`.
The next section goes into more detail about what this `Aux` thing does.


## Writing Parallel instances

If you're writing your own `Parallel` instances, the story is a little more complicated. For
example, suppose you currently have an instance like this:

```scala
implicit val myTaskPar: Parallel[MyTask, MyTask.Par] = new Parallel[MyTask, MyTask.Par] {
  //...
}
```
This will no longer compile, because the second type parameter is gone. The following will work:

```scala
implicit val myTaskPar: Parallel.Aux[MyTask, MyTask.Par] = new Parallel[MyTask] {
  type F[x] = MyTask.Par[x]
  //...
}
```
Or, equivalently but much more verbosely, you can write out the refinement by hand:
```scala
implicit val myTaskPar: Parallel[MyTask] { type F[x] = MyTask.Par[x] } =
  new Parallel[MyTask] {
    type F[x] = MyTask.Par[x]
    //...
  }
```
There's really no good reason to do that, though.

Note that both the `F` type member and the `Aux` part (or the refinement) are necessary!
Your instance _will_ compile if you have the `F` but not the `Aux`:


```scala
implicit val myTaskPar: Parallel[MyTask] = new Parallel[MyTask] {
  type F[x] = MyTask.Par[x]
  //...
}
```
But this is likely to not do what you want at some point down the line. When you try to resolve a
`Parallel[MyTask]` instance with this version, the compiler will give you back an unrefined `Parallel`,
since by putting the `Parallel[MyTask]` annotation on it here you've explicitly asked the compiler
to forget the `F` part.

The worst part here again is that the error messages you'll end up seeing because you forgot an `Aux`
are likely to be totally unhelpful, so you really just have to remember never to write an implicit
`Parallel` without the `Aux`.

You can read [this post](https://typelevel.org/blog/2015/07/19/forget-refinement-aux.html) by Stephen Compall
or [this Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/34548518/334519) for more details about
what's going on here.

## Parallel apply

There's also a [new `Parallel.apply`](https://github.com/typelevel/cats/pull/3031), so you can now
use it with either one or two type parameters:

```scala
scala> import cats.instances.parallel._, cats.instances.string._
import cats.instances.parallel._
import cats.instances.string._

scala> type E[x] = Either[String, x]
defined type alias E

scala> type V[x] = cats.data.Validated[String, x]
defined type alias V

scala> cats.Parallel[E, V]
res0: cats.Parallel.Aux[E,V] = cats.instances.ParallelInstances$$anon$1@112d5b55

scala> cats.Parallel[E]
res1: cats.Parallel[[x]scala.util.Either[String,x]]{type F[x] = cats.data.Validated[String,x]} = cats.instances.ParallelInstances$$anon$1@5d448f02
```

Note that in the second version we only asked for a `Parallel[E]`, but we got back a refined
type equivalent to `Parallel.Aux[E, V]`. This is intentional, and it's nice, because it means we can
actually use methods like `parallel` that refer to the `F` in their return types. If we had used
`implicitly` instead, we'd get something much less useful:

```scala
scala> val inst = implicitly[cats.Parallel[E]]
inst: cats.Parallel[E] = cats.instances.ParallelInstances$$anon$1@2bd44f11

scala> val s = inst.parallel(Left("foo"): Either[String, Int])
s: inst.F[Int] = Invalid(foo)
```

This `inst.F[Int]` is almost as bad as `Any`. We can't do anything with it except pass it back to
other methods on `inst`. We specifically don't know that it's a `Validated`:

```scala
scala> s.toEither
<console>:19: error: value toEither is not a member of inst.F[Int]
       s.toEither
         ^
```
With `Parallel.apply` we don't have this problem:

```scala
scala> val inst = cats.Parallel[E]
inst: cats.Parallel[[x]scala.util.Either[String,x]]{type F[x] = cats.data.Validated[String,x]} = cats.instances.ParallelInstances$$anon$1@7dd2b7f2

scala> val s = inst.parallel(Left("foo"): Either[String, Int])
s: inst.F[Int] = Invalid(foo)

scala> s.toEither
res16: Either[String,Int] = Left(foo)
```

Note that there are some cases where the new `apply` can cause old code not to compile. For example,
both of the following compile on Cats 1.x but not 2.0.0:

```scala
Parallel.apply: Parallel[Stream, ZipStream]

val p: Parallel[Stream, ZipStream] = Parallel.apply
```
The solution here is "don't do that". In general the `apply` on type classes isn't really intended
for use with inferred type parameters, and in this case it's just not supported.
